{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf400
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red50\green49\blue51;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c25490\c25098\c25882;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww17320\viewh15360\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sa300\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Hello Rutgers! \'a0(Applause.) \'a0R-U rah-rah! \'a0(Applause.) \'a0Thank you so much. \'a0Thank you. \'a0Everybody, please have a seat. \'a0Thank you, President Barchi, for that introduction. Let me congratulate my extraordinarily worthy fellow honorary Scarlet Knights, Dr. Burnell and Bill Moyers. \'a0\
Matthew, good job. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0If you are interested, we can talk after this. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\
One of the perks of my job is honorary degrees. \'a0(Laughter.) But I have to tell you, it impresses nobody in my house. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0Now Malia and Sasha just say, \'93Okay, Dr. Dad, we\'92ll see you later. \'a0Can we have some money?\'94 \'a0(Laughter.)\'a0\
To the Board of Governors; to Chairman Brown; to Lieutenant Governor Guadagno; Mayor Cahill; Mayor Wahler, members of Congress, Rutgers administrators, faculty, staff, friends, and family -- thank you for the honor of joining you for the 250th anniversary of this remarkable institution. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0But most of all, congratulations to the Class of 2016! \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 I come here for a simple reason -- to finally settle this pork roll vs. Taylor ham question. \'a0(Laughter and applause.) \'a0I'm just kidding. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0There\'92s not much I\'92m afraid to take on in my final year of office, but I know better than to get in the middle of that debate. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0\'a0\
The truth is, Rutgers, I came here because you asked. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0Now, it's true that a lot of schools invite me to their commencement every year. \'a0But you are the first to launch a three-year campaign. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0Emails, letters, tweets, YouTube videos. \'a0I even got three notes from the grandmother of your student body president. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0And I have to say that really sealed the deal. \'a0That was smart, because I have a soft spot for grandmas. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0\'a0\
So I'm here, off Exit 9, on the banks of the Old Raritan -- (applause) -- at the site of one of the original nine colonial colleges. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0Winners of the first-ever college football game. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0One of the newest members of the Big Ten. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0Home of what I understand to be a Grease Truck for a Fat Sandwich. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0Mozzarella sticks and chicken fingers on your cheesesteaks -- (applause.) \'a0I\'92m sure Michelle would approve. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0 \'a0\
But somehow, you have survived such death-defying acts. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0You also survived the daily jockeying for buses, from Livingston to Busch, to Cook, to Douglass, and back again. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0I suspect that a few of you are trying to survive this afternoon, after a late night at Olde Queens. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0You know who you are. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0 \'a0\'a0\
But, however you got here, you made it. \'a0You made it. \'a0Today, you join a long line of Scarlet Knights whose energy and intellect have lifted this university to heights its founders could not have imagined. \'a0Two hundred and fifty years ago, when America was still just an idea, a charter from the Royal Governor -- Ben Franklin\'92s son -- established Queen\'92s College. \'a0A few years later, a handful of students gathered in a converted tavern for the first class. \'a0And from that first class in a pub, Rutgers has evolved into one of the finest research institutions in America. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
This is a place where you 3D-print prosthetic hands for children, and devise rooftop wind arrays that can power entire office buildings with clean, renewable energy. \'a0Every day, tens of thousands of students come here, to this intellectual melting pot, where ideas and cultures flow together among what might just be America\'92s most diverse student body. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0Here in New Brunswick, you can debate philosophy with a classmate from South Asia in one class, and then strike up a conversation on the EE Bus with a first-generation Latina student from Jersey City, before sitting down for your psych group project with a veteran who\'92s going to school on the Post-9/11 GI Bill. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0\
America converges here. \'a0And in so many ways, the history of Rutgers mirrors the evolution of America -- the course by which we became bigger, stronger, and richer and more dynamic, and a more inclusive nation. \'a0\
But America\'92s progress has never been smooth or steady. \'a0Progress doesn\'92t travel in a straight line. \'a0It zigs and zags in fits and starts. \'a0Progress in America has been hard and contentious, and sometimes bloody. \'a0It remains uneven and at times, for every two steps forward, it feels like we take one step back. \'a0\
Now, for some of you, this may sound like your college career. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0It sounds like mine, anyway. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0Which makes sense, because measured against the whole of human history, America remains a very young nation -- younger, even, than this university.\
But progress is bumpy. \'a0It always has been. \'a0But because of dreamers and innovators and strivers and activists, progress has been this nation\'92s hallmark. \'a0I\'92m fond of quoting Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., who said, \'93The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice.\'94 \'a0(Applause.) \'a0It bends towards justice. \'a0I believe that. \'a0But I also believe that the arc of our nation, the arc of the world does not bend towards justice, or freedom, or equality, or prosperity on its own. \'a0It depends on us, on the choices we make, particularly at certain inflection points in history; particularly when big changes are happening and everything seems up for grabs.\
And, Class of 2016, you are graduating at such an inflection point. \'a0Since the start of this new millennium, you\'92ve already witnessed horrific terrorist attacks, and war, and a Great Recession. \'a0You\'92ve seen economic and technological and cultural shifts that are profoundly altering how we work and how we communicate, how we live, how we form families. \'a0The pace of change is not subsiding; it is accelerating. \'a0And these changes offer not only great opportunity, but also great peril.\'a0\
Fortunately, your generation has everything it takes to lead this country toward a brighter future. \'a0I\'92m confident that you can make the right choices -- away from fear and division and paralysis, and toward cooperation and innovation and hope. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0Now, partly, I\'92m confident because, on average, you\'92re smarter and better educated than my generation -- although we probably had better penmanship -- (laughter) -- and were certainly better spellers. \'a0We did not have spell-check back in my day. \'a0You\'92re not only better educated, you\'92ve been more exposed to the world, more exposed to other cultures. \'a0You\'92re more diverse. \'a0You\'92re more environmentally conscious. \'a0You have a healthy skepticism for conventional wisdom. \'a0\
So you\'92ve got the tools to lead us. \'a0And precisely because I have so much confidence in you, I\'92m not going to spend the remainder of my time telling you exactly how you\'92re going to make the world better. \'a0You\'92ll figure it out. \'a0You\'92ll look at things with fresher eyes, unencumbered by the biases and blind spots and inertia and general crankiness of your parents and grandparents and old heads like me. \'a0But I do have a couple of suggestions that you may find useful as you go out there and conquer the world.\'a0\
Point number one: \'a0When you hear someone longing for the \'93good old days,\'94 take it with a grain of salt. \'a0(Laughter and applause.) \'a0Take it with a grain of salt. \'a0We live in a great nation and we are rightly proud of our history. \'a0We are beneficiaries of the labor and the grit and the courage of generations who came before. \'a0But I guess it's part of human nature, especially in times of change and uncertainty, to want to look backwards and long for some imaginary past when everything worked, and the economy hummed, and all politicians were wise, and every kid was well-mannered, and America pretty much did whatever it wanted around the world. \'a0\
Guess what. \'a0It ain\'92t so. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0The \'93good old days\'94 weren\'92t that great. \'a0Yes, there have been some stretches in our history where the economy grew much faster, or when government ran more smoothly. \'a0There were moments when, immediately after World War II, for example, or the end of the Cold War, when the world bent more easily to our will. \'a0But those are sporadic, those moments, those episodes. \'a0In fact, by almost every measure, America is better, and the world is better, than it was 50 years ago, or 30 years ago, or even eight years ago. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
And by the way, I'm not -- set aside 150 years ago, pre-Civil War -- there\'92s a whole bunch of stuff there we could talk about. \'a0Set aside life in the \'9150s, when women and people of color were systematically excluded from big chunks of American life. \'a0Since I graduated, in 1983 -- which isn't that long ago -- (laughter) -- I'm just saying. \'a0Since I graduated, crime rates, teenage pregnancy, the share of Americans living in poverty -- they\'92re all down. \'a0The share of Americans with college educations have gone way up. \'a0Our life expectancy has, as well. \'a0Blacks and Latinos have risen up the ranks in business and politics. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0More women are in the workforce. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0They\'92re earning more money -- although it\'92s long past time that we passed laws to make sure that women are getting the same pay for the same work as men. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
Meanwhile, in the eight years since most of you started high school, we\'92re also better off. \'a0You and your fellow graduates are entering the job market with better prospects than any time since 2007. \'a0Twenty million more Americans know the financial security of health insurance. \'a0We\'92re less dependent on foreign oil. \'a0We\'92ve doubled the production of clean energy. \'a0We have cut the high school dropout rate. \'a0We've cut the deficit by two-thirds. \'a0Marriage equality is the law of the land. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
And just as America is better, the world is better than when I graduated. \'a0Since I graduated, an Iron Curtain fell, apartheid ended. \'a0There\'92s more democracy. \'a0We virtually eliminated certain diseases like polio. \'a0We\'92ve cut extreme poverty drastically. \'a0We've cut infant mortality by an enormous amount. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 Now, I say all these things not to make you complacent. \'a0We\'92ve got a bunch of big problems to solve. \'a0But I say it to point out that change has been a constant in our history. \'a0And the reason America is better is because we didn\'92t look backwards we didn\'92t fear the future. \'a0We seized the future and made it our own. \'a0And that\'92s exactly why it\'92s always been young people like you that have brought about big change -- because you don't fear the future. \'a0\
That leads me to my second point: \'a0The world is more interconnected than ever before, and it\'92s becoming more connected every day. \'a0Building walls won\'92t change that. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
Look, as President, my first responsibility is always the security and prosperity of the United States. \'a0And as citizens, we all rightly put our country first. \'a0But if the past two decades have taught us anything, it\'92s that the biggest challenges we face cannot be solved in isolation. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0When overseas states start falling apart, they become breeding grounds for terrorists and ideologies of nihilism and despair that ultimately can reach our shores. \'a0When developing countries don\'92t have functioning health systems, epidemics like Zika or Ebola can spread and threaten Americans, too. \'a0And a wall won't stop that. (Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
If we want to close loopholes that allow large corporations and wealthy individuals to avoid paying their fair share of taxes, we\'92ve got to have the cooperation of other countries in a global financial system to help enforce financial laws. \'a0The point is, to help ourselves we\'92ve got to help others -- (applause) -- not pull up the drawbridge and try to keep the world out.\'a0(Applause.) \'a0\'a0\
And engagement does not just mean deploying our military. \'a0There are times where we must take military action to protect ourselves and our allies, and we are in awe of and we are grateful for the men and women who make up the finest fighting force the world has ever known. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0But I worry if we think that the entire burden of our engagement with the world is up to the 1 percent who serve in our military, and the rest of us can just sit back and do nothing. \'a0They can't shoulder the entire burden. \'a0And engagement means using all the levers of our national power, and rallying the world to take on our shared challenges. \'a0\
You look at something like trade, for example. \'a0We live in an age of global supply chains, and cargo ships that crisscross oceans, and online commerce that can render borders obsolete. \'a0And a lot of folks have legitimate concerns with the way globalization has progressed -- that's one of the changes that's been taking place -- jobs shipped overseas, trade deals that sometimes put workers and businesses at a disadvantage. \'a0But the answer isn\'92t to stop trading with other countries. \'a0In this global economy, that\'92s not even possible. \'a0The answer is to do trade the right way, by negotiating with other countries so that they raise their labor standards and their environmental standards; and we make sure they don\'92t impose unfair tariffs on American goods or steal American intellectual property. \'a0That\'92s how we make sure that international rules are consistent with our values -- including human rights. \'a0And ultimately, that's how we help raise wages here in America. \'a0That\'92s how we help our workers compete on a level playing field. \'a0\
Building walls won't do that. (Applause.) \'a0It won't boost our economy, and it won\'92t enhance our security either. \'a0Isolating or disparaging Muslims, suggesting that they should be treated differently when it comes to entering this country -- (applause) -- that is not just a betrayal of our values -- (applause) -- that's not just a betrayal of who we are, it would alienate the very communities at home and abroad who are our most important partners in the fight against violent extremism. \'a0 Suggesting that we can build an endless wall along our borders, and blame our challenges on immigrants -- that doesn\'92t just run counter to our history as the world\'92s melting pot; it contradicts the evidence that our growth and our innovation and our dynamism has always been spurred by our ability to attract strivers from every corner of the globe. \'a0That's how we became America. \'a0Why would we want to stop it now? \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
AUDIENCE MEMBER: \'a0Four more years!\
THE PRESIDENT: \'a0Can't do it. \'a0(Laughter.)\'a0\
Which brings me to my third point: \'a0Facts, evidence, reason, logic, an understanding of science -- these are good things. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0These are qualities you want in people making policy. \'a0These are qualities you want to continue to cultivate in yourselves as citizens. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0That might seem obvious. (Laughter.) \'a0That's why we honor Bill Moyers or Dr. Burnell.\
We traditionally have valued those things. \'a0But if you were listening to today\'92s political debate, you might wonder where this strain of anti-intellectualism came from. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0So, Class of 2016, let me be as clear as I can be. \'a0In politics and in life, ignorance is not a virtue. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0It's not cool to not know what you're talking about. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0That's not keeping it real, or telling it like it is. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0That's not challenging political correctness. \'a0That's just not knowing what you're talking about. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0And yet, we've become confused about this. \'a0 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\
Look, our nation\'92s Founders -- Franklin, Madison, Hamilton, Jefferson -- they were born of the Enlightenment. \'a0They sought to escape superstition, and sectarianism, and tribalism, and no-nothingness. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0They believed in rational thought and experimentation, and the capacity of informed citizens to master our own fates. \'a0That is embedded in our constitutional design. \'a0That spirit informed our inventors and our explorers, the Edisons and the Wright Brothers, and the George Washington Carvers and the Grace Hoppers, and the Norman Borlaugs and the Steve Jobses. \'a0That's what built this country.\
And today, in every phone in one of your pockets -- (laughter) -- we have access to more information than at any time in human history, at a touch of a button. \'a0But, ironically, the flood of information hasn\'92t made us more discerning of the truth. In some ways, it\'92s just made us more confident in our ignorance. (Applause.) \'a0We assume whatever is on the web must be true. \'a0We search for sites that just reinforce our own predispositions. Opinions masquerade as facts. \'a0The wildest conspiracy theories are taken for gospel. \'a0\
Now, understand, I am sure you\'92ve learned during your years of college -- and if not, you will learn soon -- that there are a whole lot of folks who are book smart and have no common sense. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0That's the truth. \'a0You\'92ll meet them if you haven't already. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0So the fact that they\'92ve got a fancy degree -- you got to talk to them to see whether they know what they\'92re talking about. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0Qualities like kindness and compassion, honesty, hard work -- they often matter more than technical skills or know-how. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
But when our leaders express a disdain for facts, when they\'92re not held accountable for repeating falsehoods and just making stuff up, while actual experts are dismissed as elitists, then we\'92ve got a problem. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0\
You know, it's interesting that if we get sick, we actually want to make sure the doctors have gone to medical school, they know what they\'92re talking about. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0If we get on a plane, we say we really want a pilot to be able to pilot the plane. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0And yet, in our public lives, we certainly think, \'93I don't want somebody who\'92s done it before.\'94 \'a0(Laughter and applause.) \'a0The rejection of facts, the rejection of reason and science -- that is the path to decline. \'a0It calls to mind the words of Carl Sagan, who graduated high school here in New Jersey -- (applause) -- he said: \'a0\'93We can judge our progress by the courage of our questions and the depths of our answers, our willingness to embrace what is true rather than what feels good.\'94\'a0\
The debate around climate change is a perfect example of this. \'a0Now, I recognize it doesn\'92t feel like the planet is warmer right now. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0I understand. \'a0There was hail when I landed in Newark. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0(The wind starts blowing hard.) \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0 But think about the climate change issue. \'a0Every day, there are officials in high office with responsibilities who mock the overwhelming consensus of the world\'92s scientists that human activities and the release of carbon dioxide and methane and other substances are altering our climate in profound and dangerous ways. \'a0\
A while back, you may have seen a United States senator trotted out a snowball during a floor speech in the middle of winter as \'93proof\'94 that the world was not warming. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0I mean, listen, climate change is not something subject to political spin. \'a0There is evidence. \'a0There are facts. \'a0We can see it happening right now. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0If we don\'92t act, if we don't follow through on the progress we made in Paris, the progress we've been making here at home, your generation will feel the brunt of this catastrophe. \'a0\
So it\'92s up to you to insist upon and shape an informed debate. \'a0Imagine if Benjamin Franklin had seen that senator with the snowball, what he would think. \'a0Imagine if your 5th grade science teacher had seen that. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0He\'92d get a D. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0And he\'92s a senator! \'a0(Laughter.)\
Look, I'm not suggesting that cold analysis and hard data are ultimately more important in life than passion, or faith, or love, or loyalty. \'a0I am suggesting that those highest expressions of our humanity can only flourish when our economy functions well, and proposed budgets add up, and our environment is protected. \'a0And to accomplish those things, to make collective decisions on behalf of a common good, we have to use our heads. \'a0We have to agree that facts and evidence matter. \'a0And we got to hold our leaders and ourselves accountable to know what the heck they\'92re talking about. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
All right. \'a0I only have two more points. \'a0I know it's getting cold and you guys have to graduate. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0Point four: \'a0Have faith in democracy. \'a0Look, I know it\'92s not always pretty. \'a0 Really, I know. \'a0(Laughter.) \'a0I've been living it. \'a0But it\'92s how, bit by bit, generation by generation, we have made progress in this nation. \'a0That's how we banned child labor. \'a0That's how we cleaned up our air and our water. \'a0That's how we passed programs like Social Security and Medicare that lifted millions of seniors out of poverty. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
None of these changes happened overnight. \'a0They didn\'92t happen because some charismatic leader got everybody suddenly to agree on everything. \'a0It didn\'92t happen because some massive political revolution occurred. \'a0It actually happened over the course of years of advocacy, and organizing, and alliance-building, and deal-making, and the changing of public opinion. \'a0It happened because ordinary Americans who cared participated in the political process. \'a0\'a0\
AUDIENCE MEMBER: \'a0Because of you! \'a0(Applause.) \'a0\
THE PRESIDENT: \'a0Well, that's nice. \'a0I mean, I helped, but -- (applause.)\
Look, if you want to change this country for the better, you better start participating. \'a0I'll give you an example on a lot of people\'92s minds right now -- and that\'92s the growing inequality in our economy. \'a0Over much of the last century, we\'92ve unleashed the strongest economic engine the world has ever seen, but over the past few decades, our economy has become more and more unequal. \'a0The top 10 percent of earners now take in half of all income in the U.S. \'a0In the past, it used to be a top CEO made 20 or 30 times the income of the average worker. \'a0Today, it\'92s 300 times more. \'a0And wages aren\'92t rising fast enough for millions of hardworking families. \'a0\
Now, if we want to reverse those trends, there are a bunch of policies that would make a real difference. \'a0We can raise the minimum wage. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0We can modernize our infrastructure. We can invest in early childhood education. \'a0We can make college more affordable. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0We can close tax loopholes on hedge fund managers and take that money and give tax breaks to help families with child care or retirement. \'a0And if we did these things, then we\'92d help to restore the sense that hard work is rewarded and we could build an economy that truly works for everybody. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0\
Now, the reason some of these things have not happened, even though the majority of people approve of them, is really simple. It's not because I wasn\'92t proposing them. \'a0It wasn\'92t because the facts and the evidence showed they wouldn't work. \'a0It was because a huge chunk of Americans, especially young people, do not vote. \'a0\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 In 2014, voter turnout was the lowest since World War II. \'a0Fewer than one in five young people showed up to vote -- 2014. \'a0And the four who stayed home determined the course of this country just as much as the single one who voted. \'a0Because apathy has consequences. \'a0It determines who our Congress is. \'a0It determines what policies they prioritize. \'a0It even, for example, determines whether a really highly qualified Supreme Court nominee receives the courtesy of a hearing and a vote in the United States Senate. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
And, yes, big money in politics is a huge problem. \'a0We've got to reduce its influence. \'a0Yes, special interests and lobbyists have disproportionate access to the corridors of power. But, contrary to what we hear sometimes from both the left as well as the right, the system isn\'92t as rigged as you think, and it certainly is not as hopeless as you think. \'a0Politicians care about being elected, and they especially care about being reelected. \'a0And if you vote and you elect a majority that represents your views, you will get what you want. \'a0And if you opt out, or stop paying attention, you won\'92t. \'a0It\'92s that simple. (Applause.) \'a0It's not that complicated.\'a0\
Now, one of the reasons that people don\'92t vote is because they don\'92t see the changes they were looking for right away. \'a0Well, guess what -- none of the great strides in our history happened right away. \'a0It took Thurgood Marshall and the NAACP decades to win Brown v. Board of Education; and then another decade after that to secure the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0And it took more time after that for it to start working. \'a0It took a proud daughter of New Jersey, Alice Paul, years of organizing marches and hunger strikes and protests, and drafting hundreds of pieces of legislation, and writing letters and giving speeches, and working with congressional leaders before she and other suffragettes finally helped win women the right to vote. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0\
Each stage along the way required compromise. \'a0Sometimes you took half a loaf. \'a0You forged allies. \'a0Sometimes you lost on an issue, and then you came back to fight another day. \'a0That\'92s how democracy works. \'a0So you\'92ve got to be committed to participating not just if you get immediate gratification, but you got to be a citizen full-time, all the time. \'a0 \'a0\
And if participation means voting, and it means compromise, and organizing and advocacy, it also means listening to those who don\'92t agree with you. \'a0I know a couple years ago, folks on this campus got upset that Condoleezza Rice was supposed to speak at a commencement. \'a0Now, I don't think it's a secret that I disagree with many of the foreign policies of Dr. Rice and the previous administration. \'a0But the notion that this community or the country would be better served by not hearing from a former Secretary of State, or shutting out what she had to say -- I believe that\'92s misguided. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0I don't think that's how democracy works best, when we're not even willing to listen to each other. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0I believe that's misguided. \'a0\
If you disagree with somebody, bring them in -- (applause)\'a0-- and ask them tough questions. \'a0Hold their feet to the fire. \'a0Make them defend their positions. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0If somebody has got a bad or offensive idea, prove it wrong. \'a0Engage it. \'a0Debate it. \'a0Stand up for what you believe in. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0Don't be scared to take somebody on. \'a0Don't feel like you got to shut your ears off because you're too fragile and somebody might offend your sensibilities. \'a0Go at them if they\'92re not making any sense. Use your logic and reason and words. \'a0And by doing so, you\'92ll strengthen your own position, and you\'92ll hone your arguments. \'a0And maybe you\'92ll learn something and realize you don't know everything. \'a0And you may have a new understanding not only about what your opponents believe but maybe what you believe. \'a0Either way, you win. \'a0And more importantly, our democracy wins. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0\
So, anyway, all right. \'a0That's it, Class of 2016 -- (laughter) -- a few suggestions on how you can change the world. Except maybe I've got one last suggestion. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0Just one. \'a0And that is, gear yourself for the long haul. \'a0Whatever path you choose -- business, nonprofits, government, education, health care, the arts -- whatever it is, you're going to have some setbacks. \'a0You will deal occasionally with foolish people. \'a0You will be frustrated. \'a0You\'92ll have a boss that's not great. \'a0You won\'92t always get everything you want -- at least not as fast as you want it. \'a0So you have to stick with it. \'a0You have to be persistent. \'a0And success, however small, however incomplete, success is still success. \'a0I always tell my daughters, you know, better is good. \'a0It may not be perfect, it may not be great, but it's good. \'a0That's how progress happens -- in societies and in our own lives. \'a0\
So don\'92t lose hope if sometimes you hit a roadblock. \'a0Don't lose hope in the face of naysayers. \'a0And certainly don\'92t let resistance make you cynical. \'a0Cynicism is so easy, and cynics don\'92t accomplish much. \'a0As a friend of mine who happens to be from New Jersey, a guy named Bruce Springsteen, once sang -- (applause) -- \'93they spend their lives waiting for a moment that just don\'92t come.\'94 \'a0Don\'92t let that be you. \'a0Don\'92t waste your time waiting. \'a0\
If you doubt you can make a difference, look at the impact some of your fellow graduates are already making. \'a0Look at what Matthew is doing. \'a0Look at somebody like Yasmin Ramadan, who began organizing anti-bullying assemblies when she was 10 years old to help kids handle bias and discrimination, and here at Rutgers, helped found the Muslim Public Relations Council to work with administrators and police to promote inclusion. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0 \'a0\
Look at somebody like Madison Little, who grew up dealing with some health issues, and started wondering what his care would have been like if he lived someplace else, and so, here at Rutgers, he took charge of a student nonprofit and worked with folks in Australia and Cambodia and Uganda to address the AIDS epidemic. \'a0\'93Our generation has so much energy to adapt and impact the world,\'94 he said. \'a0\'93My peers give me a lot of hope that we\'92ll overcome the obstacles we face in society.\'94\
That's you! \'a0Is it any wonder that I am optimistic? \'a0Throughout our history, a new generation of Americans has reached up and bent the arc of history in the direction of more freedom, and more opportunity, and more justice. \'a0And, Class of 2016, it is your turn now -- (applause) -- to shape our nation\'92s destiny, as well as your own. \'a0\
So get to work. \'a0Make sure the next 250 years are better than the last. \'a0(Applause.) \'a0\
Good luck. \'a0God bless you. \'a0God bless this country we love. \'a0Thank you. \'a0(Applause.)\'a0\
}